[Previous](01.md)	[Next](03.md)
* * *
The `let` keyword is used to
create variables. 

```rust
let x = 4;
let name = "Jeff";
```

Variables in Rust are immutable or mutable. By default, any variable is 
immutable. This means that doing an assignment, `let y = 5;`, and then trying to
assign a value to the variable later, `y = 6;`, produces a compile error. 

To make variables mutable, use the `mut` keyword.

```rust
let mut a = 4;
a = 5; // compiles

let b = 4;
b = 5; // compile error
```

The different types of variables are best found by consulting the [Rust 
tutorial](http://static.rust-lang.org/doc/0.8/tutorial.html#syntax-basics).

A safe way to cast variables is to use the `as` keyword.

```rust
let x = 4u; // x is an unsigned integer
let y = x as i32; // y is x as a 32-bit integer
```

Another example will help clarify with and the previous section. This code 
recursively computes the number of steps in a number's Collatz seqeunce.

```rust
fn main()
{
	let steps = collatz(10, 0);
	print(format!("{:?}", steps));
}

fn collatz(x: int, steps: int) -> int
{
	if x == 1
	{
		return steps;
	}

	if x%2 == 0
	{
		return collatz(x/2, steps+1);
	}
	else
	{
		return collatz(x*3+1, steps+1);
	}
}
```

There are one or two new things here. The first is the `format!`. The `!` means
that it is a macro, and `format!` is used to print data in human readable form.
It's similar to C's `printf`.

The second new bit is specific to Rust's syntax. `if` statements don't have
parenthesis around their conditionals. However, each `if` statement must have a
body, and that body must be surrounded by braces.

Rust also features a `match` statement. It's an alternative to `if` statements 
and is considered "prettier". The last `if-else` group can be replaced with a 
match statement.

```rust
fn main()
{
	let steps = collatz(10, 0);
	print(format!("{:?}\n", steps));
}

fn collatz(x: int, steps: int) -> int
{
	if x == 1
	{
		return steps;
	}

	match x%2	
	{
		0 => { return collatz(x/2, steps+1); }
		_ => { return collatz(x*3+1, steps+1); }
	}
}
```

The `_` is similar to a `switch` statement's `default` in Java. If nothing
matches the variable, the statement falls through to the `_` case. The Rust
compiler requires an execution path for each possible outcome, and will 
complain if the match conditions are not exhaustive. It's not an oracle though,
 and will throw an error if the `_` is replaced with `1`. (It's better with 
 booleans.)

The follow `if-else` statement and `match` statement are equivalent.
```rust
if doSomething == true
{
	doSomething();
}
else
{
	doNothing();
}

match doSomething
{
	true => { doSomething(); }
	false => { doNothing(); }
	// no _ is needed. The compiler can figure out that this match
	// statement is exhaustive.
}
```

One additional thing to note about `match` statements is that the code for a
case must be surrounded in braces, even if it's empty.

```rust
match x
{
	4 => { print("It's four"); }
	// 5 => print("It's five"); // not valid
	_ => {;}
}
```

* * *
[Previous](01.md)	[Next](03.md)